# ML group project: The Survival of The Titanic

## Introduction 

This project uses the passenger data from the Titanic to correctly predict the passengers who died or survived as a result of the sinking ship. The project uses a range of different supervised machine learning models to attempt at an accurate result. Different metrics are used to evaluate the results from each model in order to investigate the advantages and limitations of different classification models

## Abstract
On April 15, 1912, the Titanic, a British passenger liner sunk in the Atlantic ocean resulting in the death of over half of the passengers. Data from the voyage containing information about whether the passengers survived or not was accessed. The data contains a number of additional variables including the passengers’ age, sex and ticket class. Using supervised machine learning algorithms which train on this data, the survival of passengers based on these variables can be computed.This study compares the performance of four classification models to determine the optimum algorithm for predicting survivability. The selected models were Logistic Regression, Fisher’s Linear Discriminant Analysis, K-Nearest Neighbours and Random Forest Classifier. Performance metrics, such as, the accuracy of the predictions and the time-taken to run each model were used to compare the algorithms. Whilst limitations prevented certain metrics from being examined, experiments indicated a reasonable performance from all four models with varying areas of success for each. Therefore, the requirements of a given task are best suited for determining the optimum model.

## Software Implementation

The data used in this study is provided in the data folder. Plots generated by the code are saved in the plots folder.

The structure of the code involves six main files of the project as described below.

(1) exploration.py: This python file was created for preliminary analysis of the data. Running this file would produce printed tables and values, as well as plots of the data. This first hand analysis was done to understand the relationship between the different features. 

(2) preprocessing.py: The analysed data is then processed before machine learning models are implemented. Certain features were dropped or filled with values. Non-numerical features were mapped to numerical values.

(3) methods.py: This file contains the functions for the models used in this project.

(4) evaluation.py: This file contains the functions of the different metrics used to evaluate the models such as K-fold cross validation and confusion matrix.

(5) comparison.py: This file contains the functions for comparing the metrics for all four models assessed.

(6) main.py: In this file, all the previous function are imported and compiled together to obtain the model predictions, accuracies and results from cross evaluation metrics.


### Code

The dataset was downloaded from https://www.kaggle.com/c/titanic. You can download a copy of all the files in this repository by cloning the git repository:

git clone https://github.com/RifatM97/ML-group-project.git

## Reproducing the Results

To be able to run this project a working python environment is required. It is recommended to set up an environment through the Anaconda terminal using the conda packages. To run the code in full follow the steps below:

* Install required modules using modules using Pip:`pip install -r requirements.txt`

* To run all results and comparisons:`python main.py data\train.csv`
    (Running time: approximately 12 minutes)

* To run the results for a specific model, state it as the third argument (see below).  

### Machine Learning Models

Four machine learning models were used in this project. 

* Logistic Regression: TODO

`python main.py data\train.csv logistic` 

(Running time: 30 seconds)

* Linear Discriminant Analysis: Projects the data down to one dimension and separates the projected data into classes. Function written in methods.py

`python main.py data\train.csv fisher`

(Running time: 10 seconds)

* K-Nearest Neighbours: Uses the SciKit Learn API to implement the training classifier. 

`python main.py data\train.csv knn` 

(Running time: 3 seconds)

* Random Forest Classifier: Uses the SciKit Learn API to implement the training classifier. 

`python main.py data\train.csv forest` 

(Running time: 5 seconds)


## Authors

Foundations of Machine Learning (INST0060) - Group Project

## References:
[1] Ang Peng Seng (2018), Basic Classification methods for Titanic [python], URL: https://www.kaggle.com/angps95/basic-classification-methods-for-titanic 

[2] Donges, N (2018), Predicting the Survival of Titanic Passengers [python], URL: https://towardsdatascience.com/predicting-the-survival-of-titanic-passengers-30870ccc7e8
